Add notebook and code to run light_curve_generator at scale (#215)
fornax-navo/fornax-demo-notebooks: light_curves/scale_up.md

Both types can be called from the command-line -- open a new terminal and copy/paste the cell text without the beginning symbol. The bash script is not intended to be executed from within a notebook and may behave strangely if attempted.
Also be aware that the script path shown in the commands below assumes you are in the same directory as this notebook. Adjust it if needed.

+++

## Overview

### What the script and helper do

+++

The python "helper" is a set of wrapper functions around the same 'code_src/' functions used in the light_curve_generator notebook.
- The wrappers facilitate parallelization and large-scale runs by automating tasks like saving the function outputs to files.
- The helper does not actually implement parallelization and can only run one function per call.
- The helper can be used in combination with any parallel processing method.
- The helper can load `top` output from a file to pandas DataFrames and make some figures.

The bash script allows the user to launch the full run with a single command and provides some automated logging and `top` monitoring.

> - When a run is launched, the script calls the helper to gather the requested sample and then launches jobs for each archive query in separate, parallel processes.
>   The script then exits leaving the archive jobs running in the background.
> - The script redirects stdout and stderr to log files, one per job.
> - The script tells the user what the process PIDs are and where the log and data files are.
> - In case the run needs to be canceled, the script can find and kill all the processes it launched.
> - The script can monitor `top` during the run, saving `top` output to a log file at a user-defined interval(s). The helper can be used to load this file in python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In a nutshell, the script does the following:
  - calls the helper to gather the requested sample and then launches jobs for each archive query in separate, parallel processes.
  - redirects stdout and stderr to log files
  - tells the user what the process PIDs are and where the log and data files are.
  - monitor `top` during the run, saving `top` output to a log file at a user-defined interval(s).
  - exits leaving the archive jobs running in the background.
In case the run needs to be canceled, the script can find and kill all the processes it launched.

```

Author: I've updated this text using most of what you suggested, but correcting the bit about `top` which I see was confusing.

+++

> ### Parallel processing methods: bash script vs. python's `multiprocessing`

Reviewer: I would suggest this section goes above the description of the bash script and python helper

Author: Done

+++

- Bash script. Recommended for most runs with medium to large samples. Allows ZTF to use additional parallelization internally, and so is often faster (ZTF often takes the longest and returns the most data for AGN-like samples). Writes stdout and stderr to log files, useful for monitoring jobs and resource usage. Can monitor and record `top` to help identify CPU and RAM usage/needs.

> - Python's `multiprocessing` library. Useful as a demonstration. May be convenient for runs with small to medium sample sizes. Has drawbacks that may be significant including the inability to use ZTF's internal parallelization and that it does not save the log output (stdout and stderr) to file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Python's `multiprocessing` library. May be convenient for runs with small to medium sample sizes (< few thousand). Has drawbacks that may be significant including the inability to use ZTF's internal parallelization and that it does not save the log output (stdout and stderr) to file.
```

+++

### Imports

```{code-cell}
# Ensure all dependencies are installed
!pip install -r requirements.txt
```

```{code-cell}
import json  # create json strings for bash script arguments
import multiprocessing  # python parallelization method
import pandas as pd  # use a DataFrame to work with light-curve and other data
import sys  # add code directories to the path

sys.path.append("code_src/")
import helpers.scale_up  # python "helper" for parallelization and large scale runs
import helpers.top  # load `top` output to DataFrames and make figures
from data_structures import MultiIndexDFObject  # load light curve data as a MultiIndexDFObject
from plot_functions import create_figures  # make light curve figures
```

## Example 1: Multi-wavelength light curves for 500,000 SDSS AGN

+++

> This example shows how to launch a large-scale run using the bash script, monitor its performance, and diagnose a problem (out of RAM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to launch a large-scale collection of light curves using the bash script, monitor its performance, and diagnose a problem (out of RAM).
```

This run collects light curves for 500,000 SDSS objects and takes several hours to complete, but is not actually executed here.
Instead, we show the bash commands and then look at logs that were generated by running the commands on 2024/03/01.

+++

### Launch the run

+++

```bash
# This will launch a very large scale run.
# See Example 3 for a detailed explanation of parameter options.
# If you are running this for the first time, reduce the sample size 500000 -> 50.

# run_id will be used in future calls to manage this run, and also determines the name of the output directory.
$ run_id="demo-SDSS-500k"

# Execute the run:
$ bash code_src/helpers/scale_up.sh \
    -r "$run_id" \
    -j '{"get_samples": {"SDSS": {"num": 500000}}, "archives": {"ZTF": {"nworkers": 8}}}' \
    -a "core"  # shortcut for "Gaia HEASARC IceCube WISE ZTF"
```

> 

Reviewer: clarify if this run is only for ZTF, since ZTF is explicitly mentioned, but then the line below it implies that it is searching Gaia, Heasarc, Icecube, WISE, ZTF.  

Also, one day we will need to change "core" to include MAST, or just remove it.

Author: Clarification added. 

Also, "core" and "all" were useful shortcuts for me so that I didn't have to remember them every time. But if you'd prefer not to expose them here in the notebook we could just list out the archive names.

Author: I replaced "core" in all the function and script calls with the explicit list of archives. I also scrubbed the reference out of all the documentation. The actual list still exists and can be used, but the user would have to look directly at the `ARCHIVE_NAMES` dictionary where it's defined in order to find it. I also I renamed it to "scaled" since this is the subset that is expected to run successfully at scale. Probably still not the best name, but better than "core".

    -a "core" \
    -d "overwrite_existing_sample=false" \
    -d "overwrite_existing_lightcurves=false"
```

+++

### Monitor

+++

There are at least three places to look for information about a run's status.
- Check the logs for job status or errors. The bash script will redirect stdout and stderr to log files and print out the paths for you.
- Check for light curve (parquet) data. The script will print out the "parquet_dir". `ls` this directory. You will see a subdirectory for each archive call that has completed successfully, assuming it retrieved data for the sample.
-  Watch `top`. The script will print the job PIDs. The script can also monitor `top` for you and save the output to a log file.

+++

#### Logs

Gaia log from 2024/03/01 (success):

```{code-cell}
!cat output/lightcurves-demo-SDSS-500k/logs/gaia.log
```

ZTF log from 2024/03/01 (failure):

```{code-cell}
!cat output/lightcurves-demo-SDSS-500k/logs/ztf.log
```

The logs above show that the ZTF job loaded the light curve data successfully ("100%") but exited without writing the parquet file (no "Light curves saved" message like Gaia).
The data was lost.
There is also no indication of an error; the job just ends.

> We can spot what happened by looking at the `top` output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can diagnose what happened by looking at the `top` output.
```

+++

#### `top`

During a run, you can use the `-t` (top) flag to have the script monitor `top` for you and save the output to a log file.

> To capture the complete run, open a second terminal and call the script with `-t` right after launching the run.

Reviewer: I don't understand this.  If i just run the bash scale_up.sh with a -t will it do to the top monitoring, or do I need to call the bash script twice in two different terminal windows?

Author: To have the bash script monitor top, it needs to be called separately from the call that launches the run. I have clarified the text in various places in the notebook.

There are many interesting features in the figure that the reader may want to look at in more detail.
For example, other than ZTF's memory spike at the end, we see that the full run collecting multi-wavelength light curves for the SDSS 500k sample could be completed with about 2 CPU and 60G RAM.

We want to learn why the ZTF job failed.
Let's zoom in on that time period:

```{code-cell}
fig = toplog.plot_overview(between_time=("22:55", "23:10"))
```

In the second panel above we see the ZTF worker processes (which load the light curve data) ending just after 23:00 and then the ZTF parent process continues by itself.
Around 23:06 in the fourth panel, we see the ZTF job's memory usage rise sharply to almost 100% and then drop immediately to zero when the job terminates.
This coincides with the total available memory dropping to near zero in the third panel.
This shows that the machine did not have enough memory for the ZTF call to successfully transform the light curve data collected by the workers into a `MultiIndexDFObject` and write it as a parquet file, so the machine killed the job.

> The solution is to rerun ZTF on a machine with more RAM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The solution is to rerun the ZTF archive call on a machine with more RAM.
```

        ]
    },
    "SDSS": {"num": 10, "zmin": 0.5, "zmax": 2, "randomize_z": True},
    "ZTF_objectid": {"objectids": ["ZTF18aabtxvd", "ZTF18aahqkbt", "ZTF18abxftqm", "ZTF18acaqdaa"]},
}

archives = {
    "Gaia": {"search_radius": 2 / 3600},
    "HEASARC": {"catalog_error_radii": {"FERMIGTRIG": 1.0, "SAXGRBMGRB": 3.0}},
    "IceCube": {"icecube_select_topN": 4, "max_search_radius": 2.0},
    "WISE": {"radius": 1.5, "bandlist": ["W1", "W2"]},
    "ZTF": {"nworkers": 6, "match_radius": 2 / 3600},
}

yaml_kwargs_dict = {
    "get_samples": get_samples,
    "consolidate_nearby_objects": False,
    "archives": archives,
}

helpers.scale_up.write_kwargs_to_yaml(run_id=yaml_run_id, **yaml_kwargs_dict)
```

The path to the yaml file is printed in the output above.
You can alter the contents of the file as you like.
To use the file, set the kwarg `use_yaml=True`.

Python example for the get-sample step:

```{code-cell}
sample_table = helpers.scale_up.run(build="sample", run_id=yaml_run_id, use_yaml=True)
```

Bash example:

+++

```bash
$ yaml_run_id=demo-kwargs-yaml
$ bash code_src/helpers/scale_up.sh -r "$yaml_run_id" -d "use_yaml=true" -a "core"
```

+++

> ### Using a json string

Reviewer: This is slightly too complicated for me.  Already the yaml file is a stretch, but I see that it is a good idea for bookkeeping.  Maybe leave this in the function documentation, but not in the tutorial notebook.

Author: Removed

  name: python3
---

# Make Multi-Wavelength Light Curves for Large Samples

+++

## Learning Goals

By the end of this tutorial, you will be able to:

- Parallelize the code demonstrated in the [light_curve_generator](light_curve_generator.md) notebook to get multi-wavelength light curves.
- Launch a run using a large sample of objects, monitor the run's progress automatically, and understand its resource usage (CPU and RAM).
- Understand some general challenges and requirements when scaling up code.

+++

## Introduction

+++

This notebook shows how to collect multi-wavelength light curves for a large sample of target objects.
This is a scaling-up of the [light_curve_generator](light_curve_generator.md) and assumes you are familiar with the content of that notebook.
This code should be used for sample sizes greater than a few hundred.
Many of the challenges, needs, and wants discussed in the appendix and addressed throughout the notebook are common when scaling up code and the ideas can be applied to other use cases.

Notebook sections are:

- "Overview" describes functionality of the included bash script and python helper functions. Compares some parallel processing options.

> - "Example 1" shows how to launch a large-scale run using the bash script, monitor its progress automatically, and diagnose a problem (out of RAM).

Author: I agree and have tried but am also unable to get it to work. I tried the only option from the [myst-parser docs](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/cross-referencing.html) that seemed like it should work in all cases (Annotating a syntax block with `(target)=`). External links to files or URLs seem to work, but not links to a section within the notebook. I'm guessing this doesn't work because the markdown in different notebook cells is isolated from the others in some way.

Interested to hear if @bsipocz knows of a solution.

- The helper can load `top` output from a file to pandas DataFrames and make some figures.

### The bash script

The bash script allows the user to collect light curves from a large scale sample with a single command and provides options to help manage and monitor the run.
In a nutshell, the script does the following when called using flags that "launch a run":

- calls the helper to gather the requested sample and then launches jobs for each archive query in separate, parallel processes.
- redirects stdout and stderr to log files.
- tells the user what the process PIDs are and where the log and data files are.
- exits, leaving the archive jobs running in the background.

In case all the archive calls need to be canceled after the script exits, the user can call the script again with a different flag to have it find and kill all the processes it launched.

While the jobs are running, the user can call the script again with a different flag to have it save `top` output to a log file at a user-defined interval.
The helper can be used to load this file to pandas DataFrames and make some figures.

+++

### Imports

```{code-cell}
# Ensure all dependencies are installed

> !pip install -r requirements.txt

Reviewer 2: hmm, should we suggest `pip install -U -r requirements.txt`, or to work from a clean environment first and only run the install at the first time? I'm not exactly sure, but am rather certain these types of issues will pop up for users all the time

> !pip install -r requirements.txt

Author: Oh, the final line says `PermissionError: Forbidden`. I'm guessing you encountered this on irsakusp? ZTF and WISE are both still in that private bucket and I'm guessing you don't have credentials for that bucket setup there. SMCE has the credentials pre-packaged in the image.

> !pip install -r requirements.txt

Author: Re: the `pip` dependency resolver error, I could switch this to use a pyarrow filesystem object which I think(?) doesn't rely on boto3/botocore. But I don't know whether other code in the light_curves directory will require boto anyway.

> !pip install -r requirements.txt

Reviewer 2: a full astroquery/pyvo install will bring it on, though I don't think we do a full dependency install for those, or in fact for any of the packages.

> !pip install -r requirements.txt

Reviewer 2: but overall, this is one of those questions that could be moved out to a separate issue from this PR

> !pip install -r requirements.txt

Reviewer: and yes, I forgot about the bucket credentials thing and was running on the ISP.

> !pip install -r requirements.txt

Author: #262

+++

#### `top`

While the jobs are running, you can monitor `top` and save the output to a log file by calling the script again with the `-t` flag.
This call must be separate from the call that launches the run.
If you want to capture the sample step as well as the archive queries, open a second terminal and call the script with `-t` right after launching the run in the first terminal.

+++

```bash
$ interval=10m  # choose your interval
$ bash code_src/helpers/scale_up.sh -r "run_id" -t "$interval"
```

+++

The script will continue running until after all of run_id's jobs have completed.
You can cancel at anytime with `Control-C` and start it again with a new interval.

Once saved to file, the helper can parse the `top` output into pandas DataFrames and make some figures.

`top` output from 2024/03/01:

```{code-cell}
run_id = "demo-SDSS-500k"
logs_dir = helpers.scale_up.run(build="logs_dir", run_id=run_id)

toplog = helpers.top.load_top_output(toptxt_dir=logs_dir, run_id=run_id)
```

```{code-cell}
toplog.summary_df.sample(5)
```

```{code-cell}
toplog.pids_df.sample(5)
```

```{code-cell}
fig = toplog.plot_overview()
```

> In the figure above, "Total" is the machine total, the "%CPU" panel is grouped by PID (process ID), and the "%MEM" panel is grouped by job.

Author: Done

```

The helper can recognize these tags and show them on a figure:

```{code-cell}
ztf_toplog = helpers.top.load_top_output(toptxt_file="top.tag-ztf.txt", toptxt_dir=logs_dir, run_id=run_id)

fig = ztf_toplog.plot_time_tags(summary_y="used_GiB")
# (This run starts by reading a previously cached parquet file containing the raw data returned by workers.)
```

This figure shows that almost 100G RAM is required for the ZTF job to succeed.
It further shows that the "explode" step requires the most memory, followed by creating the MultiIndexDFObject.
From here, the user can choose an appropriately sized machine and/or consider whether `ztf_get_lightcurves` could be made to use less memory.

+++

## Example 2: Parallelizing the light_curve_generator notebook

+++

This example shows how to parallelize the example from the light_curve_generator notebook using the helper and python's `multiprocessing`.
An advantage of the example shown here is that it automatically saves the sample and light curve data to disk after loading them and can automatically skip those steps in subsequent calls and use the files instead.

> 

Author: Actually there's no difference in performance here vs the light_curve_generator parallel call. The only advantages are what I mention above about saving files and that this will print out the PIDs so you know which job is running in which process. I clarified by adding:

> This is a small sample (Yang, 30 objects). If you want a sample larger than a few hundred, consider using the bash script instead.

with multiprocessing.Pool(processes=len(archive_names)) as pool:
    # submit one job per archive
    for archive in archive_names:
        pool.apply_async(helpers.scale_up.run, kwds={"build": "lightcurves", "archive": archive, **kwargs_dict})
    pool.close()  # signal that no more jobs will be submitted to the pool
    pool.join()  # wait for all jobs to complete

# Note: The console output from different archive calls gets jumbled together below.
# Worse, error messages tend to get lost in the background and never displayed.
# If you have trouble, consider running an archive call individually without the Pool
# or using the bash script instead.
```

The light curve data is saved as a parquet dataset in the "parquet_dir" directory.
Load it:

```{code-cell}
# copy/paste the directory path from the output above, or ask the helper for it like this:
parquet_dir = helpers.scale_up.run(build="parquet_dir", **kwargs_dict)
df_lc = pd.read_parquet(parquet_dir)

df_lc.sample(10)
```

Now we can make figures:

```{code-cell}
_ = create_figures(df_lc=MultiIndexDFObject(data=df_lc), show_nbr_figures=1, save_output=False)
```

> 

Author: I confirmed that ZTF data is collected and displayed here when credentials for the relevant AWS bucket are available.

            {"paper_link": "2020ApJ...896...10B", "label": "Palomar variable 20"},
        ]
    },
    "SDSS": {"num": 10, "zmin": 0.5, "zmax": 2, "randomize_z": True},
    "ZTF_objectid": {"objectids": ["ZTF18aabtxvd", "ZTF18aahqkbt", "ZTF18abxftqm", "ZTF18acaqdaa"]},
}

archives = {
    "Gaia": {"search_radius": 2 / 3600},
    "HEASARC": {"catalog_error_radii": {"FERMIGTRIG": 1.0, "SAXGRBMGRB": 3.0}},
    "IceCube": {"icecube_select_topN": 4, "max_search_radius": 2.0},
    "WISE": {"radius": 1.5, "bandlist": ["W1", "W2"]},
    "ZTF": {"nworkers": 6, "match_radius": 2 / 3600},
}

yaml_kwargs_dict = {
    "get_samples": get_samples,
    "consolidate_nearby_objects": False,
    "archives": archives,
}

helpers.scale_up.write_kwargs_to_yaml(run_id=yaml_run_id, **yaml_kwargs_dict)
```

The path to the yaml file is printed in the output above.
You can alter the contents of the file as you like.
To use the file, set the kwarg `use_yaml=True`.

Python example for the get-sample step:

```{code-cell}
sample_table = helpers.scale_up.run(build="sample", run_id=yaml_run_id, use_yaml=True)
```

Bash example:

+++

```bash
$ yaml_run_id=demo-kwargs-yaml

> $ bash code_src/helpers/scale_up.sh -r "$yaml_run_id" -d "use_yaml=true" -a "core"

Reviewer: pointing out another place where "core" gets used.

```

+++

## Appendix: What to expect

+++

### Challenges of large-scale runs

+++

Scaling up to large sample sizes brings new challenges.
Even if things go smoothly, each function call may need to use a lot more resources like CPU, RAM, and bandwidth, and may take much longer to complete.
Also, we'll want to run some functions in parallel to save time overall, but that will mean they must compete with each other for resources.

These issues are complicated by the fact that different combinations of samples and archive calls can trigger different problems.
Inefficiencies in any part of the process -- our code, archive backends, etc. -- which may have been negligible at small scale can balloon into significant hurdles.

Problems can manifest in different ways.

> For example, progress may to slow to a crawl, or it may run smoothly for several hours and then crash suddenly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, progress may slow to a crawl, or it may run smoothly for several hours and then crash suddenly.
```

If the job is running in the background, print statements and error messages may get lost and never be displayed for the user if they are not redirected to a file.

+++

### Needs and wants for large-scale runs

+++

> The main goal is to speed up the run, so we want to look for opportunities to parallelize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main goal is to speed up total time it takes to run the full code, so we want to look for opportunities to parallelize.
```

We can group the light_curve_generator code into two main steps: (1) gather the target object sample; then (2) generate light curves by querying the archives and standardizing the returned data.

> All of the archive calls have to wait for the sample to be available before starting, but then they can run independently in parallel.

Reviewer: Maybe add that gathering the sample does not take long compared to the archive calls, so the real opportunity for parallelization lies in the archive calls.

> We need to be able to monitor the run's resource usage and capture print statements, error messages, etc. to log files in order to understand if/when something goes wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is useful to be able to monitor the run's resource usage and capture print statements, error messages, etc. to log files in order to understand if/when something goes wrong.
```

Even with parallelization, gathering light curves for a large sample of objects is likely to take a few hours at least.
So we want to automate the monitoring tasks as much as possible.

If the run fails, we'd like to be able to restart it without having to redo steps that were previously successful.
To accomplish this, the inputs and outputs need to be less tightly coupled than they are in the light_curve_generator notebook.
Specifically, we want to save the sample and light curve data to file as soon as each piece is collected, and we want the archive functions to be able to get the `sample_table` input from file.

The python helper and bash script were specifically designed to fulfill many of these wants and needs.

+++

> ### What the user should do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Advice for the user
```
